# Much More 2023 JSON

ToC
* A Brief History of JSON
* This is JSON!
* Python Supports JSON Natively
    * A Little Vocabulary
    * Serializing JSON
    * A Simple Serialization Example
    * Some Useful Keyword Arguments
    * Deserializing JSON
    * A Simple Deserialization Example
* Real World Example (not really)
* Encoding and Decoding Custom Python Objects
    * Simplifying Data Structures
    * Encoding Custom Types
    * Decoding Custom Types
* End

Since its beginning, JSON has quickly become a de facto standard for information exchange. 
<br>
I always struggle with data extraction when I need to transport some data from somewhere to other places. Mostly i am trying to gather information through an API and/or storing data in a document database. 
It is tedious work and a change is needed: JSON is supposed to be easy and so is Python - but it doesnt work for me - time to change that.
<br>
It is a pretty common task, JSON is used to store and exchange data.
It is nothing more than a standardized format one uses to pass data around. JSON, XML and YAML are the most common ones in use today (I think).

## A Brief History of JSON

JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) was inspired by a subset of the JavaScript programming language dealing with object literal syntax. 
JSON is today not deeply connected to java script (but it originates from the same project). It is today language agnostic and exists as its own standard (so, no JavaScript programming tec ...)

Today the world has at large adopted JSON because it is easy for both humans and machines to create and understand.

## This is JSON!

Here is some real life JSON-stuff (a list of bestselling books) taken from [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_best-selling_books)


```python
{
  "description": "Best-selling books",
  "source": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_best-selling_books",
  "books": 
    [
    { "title": "The Lord of the Rings", "author": "J. R. R. Tolkien" },
    { "title": "The Little Prince", "author": "Antoine de Saint-Exupéry" },
    { "title": "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows", "author": "J. K. Rowling" },
    { "title": "The Alchemist", "author": "Paulo Coelho" },
    { "title": "Rainbow Fish", "author": "Marcus Pfister" }
  ]
}
```




    {'description': 'Best-selling books',
     'source': 'https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_best-selling_books',
     'books': [{'title': 'The Lord of the Rings', 'author': 'J. R. R. Tolkien'},
      {'title': 'The Little Prince', 'author': 'Antoine de Saint-Exupéry'},
      {'title': 'Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows', 'author': 'J. K. Rowling'},
      {'title': 'The Alchemist', 'author': 'Paulo Coelho'},
      {'title': 'Rainbow Fish', 'author': 'Marcus Pfister'}]}



As you can see, JSON supports primitive types, like strings and numbers, as well as nested lists and objects.    

## Python Supports JSON Natively

Python comes with a built-in package called json for encoding and decoding JSON data.

Just add this import at the top of the file:
import json
## A Little Vocabulary

The process of encoding JSON is usually called serialization. The term refers to the transformation of data into a series of bytes to be stored or transmitted across a network. 
<br>
Deserialization is the reciprocal process of decoding data that has been stored or delivered in the JSON standard.

All in all: it's about  reading and writing - encoding is for writing data to disk and decoding is for reading data into memory.

## Serializing JSON

After a computer processes information it needs to take a data dump(yes, really!). Accordingly, the json library exposes the dump() method for writing data to files. There is also a dumps() method (pronounced as “dump-s”) for writing to a Python string.

Simple Python objects are translated to JSON according to a fairly intuitive conversion.
Python JSON
dict object
list, tuple array
str string
int, long, float number
True true
False false
None null

|Python | JSON
| ---- | ---- |
|dict | object
|list, tuple | array
|str |   string
|int, long, float | number
|True | true
|False | false
|None | null

## A Simple Serialization Example

You are working with a Python object in memory that looks like this:


```python
data = {
    "queen": {
        "name": "Padme Amidala",
        "species": "Naboo"
    }
}
```

## Context manager

This information above needs to be saved to disk. It has to be written to a file, and a context manager allow us to sandwich some code in an entrance step and an exit step.

Files opened with <b>with</b> close automatically

Context managers are objects that can be used in Python's with statements.
Using Pythons context manager, you can create a file called data_file.json and open it in write mode.


```python
import json

with open("data_file.json", "w") as write_file:
    json.dump(data, write_file)
```

Note that dump() takes two positional arguments:
* 1 the data object to be serialized
* 2 the file-like object to which the bytes will be written.

One can also continue to use this serialized JSON data and write it to a native Python str object


```python
json_string = json.dumps(data)
```

Notice that the file-like object is absent - it is not actually writen to disk.

## Some Useful Keyword Arguments

JSON is meant to be easily readable by humans, but readable syntax is not enough if all squished together.

The first option most people want to change is whitespace. You can use the indent keyword argument to specify the indentation size for nested structures. Check out the difference for yourself by using data, which we defined above, and running the following commands in a console:

(Do commands below in a console)

<b>json.dumps(data)</b>
<br>
or
<br>
<b>json.dumps(data, indent=4)</b>

Another formatting option is the separators keyword argument. 
By default, this is a 2-tuple of the separator strings (", ", ": "), but a common alternative for compact JSON is (",", ":"). Take a look at the sample JSON again to see where these separators come into play.

## Deserializing JSON

In the json library, we have load() and loads() for turning JSON encoded data into Python objects.

Just like serialization, there is a simple conversion table for deserialization.

|JSON | Python
| ---- | ---- |
|object |dict
|array | list
|string | str
|number (int) | int
|number (real) | float
|true | True
|false | False
|null | None

Technically, if you encode an object now and then decode it again later, you may not get exactly the same object back:

## A Simple Deserialization Example

So, we have some data stored on disk that we need to manipulate in memory. 
We are still using the context manager, but this time we open up the existing data_file.json in read mode:


```python
with open("data_file.json", "r") as read_file:
    data = json.load(read_file)
```

Things are pretty straightforward here, but keep in mind that the result of this method could return any of the allowed data types from the conversion table. This is only important if you’re loading in data you haven’t seen before. In most cases, the root object will be a dict or a list.

If you’ve pulled JSON data in from another program or have otherwise obtained a string of JSON formatted data in Python, you can easily deserialize that with loads(), which naturally loads from a string:


```python
json_string = """
{
    "pilot": {
        "name": "Han Solo",
        "species": "Human",
        "friends": [
            {
                "name": "Padme Amidala",
                "species": "Naboo"
            }
        ]
    }
}
"""
data = json.loads(json_string)
```

Jupp, just like that!
JSON is OK

## Real World Example (not really)

As a introductory example, we will use [JSONPlaceholder](https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/), a great source of fake JSON data for practice purposes.

First we create a script called scratch.py, or sometgingxxx.

We need to make an API request to the JSONPlaceholder service, so just use the requests package to do the heavy lifting. 
Add these imports at the top of the scriptfile:


```python
import json
import requests
```

Now, we will be working with a list of TODO:s.

Make a request to the JSONPlaceholder API for the /todos endpoint.
<br>
If you are unfamiliar with requests, there is a usefull json() method that can do most of the work needed. But one can practice using the json library to deserialize the text attribute of the response object. 
<br>
It should look something like this:


```python
response = requests.get("https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos")
todos = json.loads(response.text)
```

Run the file.
<br>
Check the type of todos. For example, the first 10 items in the list.


```python
todos == response.json()
type(todos)
todos[:8]
```




    [{'userId': 1, 'id': 1, 'title': 'delectus aut autem', 'completed': False},
     {'userId': 1,
      'id': 2,
      'title': 'quis ut nam facilis et officia qui',
      'completed': False},
     {'userId': 1, 'id': 3, 'title': 'fugiat veniam minus', 'completed': False},
     {'userId': 1, 'id': 4, 'title': 'et porro tempora', 'completed': True},
     {'userId': 1,
      'id': 5,
      'title': 'laboriosam mollitia et enim quasi adipisci quia provident illum',
      'completed': False},
     {'userId': 1,
      'id': 6,
      'title': 'qui ullam ratione quibusdam voluptatem quia omnis',
      'completed': False},
     {'userId': 1,
      'id': 7,
      'title': 'illo expedita consequatur quia in',
      'completed': False},
     {'userId': 1,
      'id': 8,
      'title': 'quo adipisci enim quam ut ab',
      'completed': True}]



https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos

We can see the structure of the data by visiting the endpoint of todos, itis the endpoint of todos in: https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/  
<br>
If you go to Resources ...   ... /todos 200 todos    (same as: https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos)

First post is:


```python
{
    "userId": 1,
    "id": 1,
    "title": "delectus aut autem",
    "completed": false
}
```

There are multiple users, each with a unique userId, and each task has a Boolean completed property. 
<br>
<br>
Can you determine which users have completed the most tasks?    xxxxxxxxxxxx


```python
# Map of userId to number of complete TODOs for that user
todos_by_user = {}

# Increment complete TODOs count for each user.
for todo in todos:
    if todo["completed"]:
        try:
            # Increment the existing user's count.
            todos_by_user[todo["userId"]] += 1
        except KeyError:
            # This user has not been seen. Set their count to 1.
            todos_by_user[todo["userId"]] = 1

# Create a sorted list of (userId, num_complete) pairs.
top_users = sorted(todos_by_user.items(), 
                   key=lambda x: x[1], reverse=True)

# Get the maximum number of complete TODOs.
max_complete = top_users[0][1]

# Create a list of all users who have completed
# the maximum number of TODOs.
users = []
for user, num_complete in top_users:
    if num_complete < max_complete:
        break
    users.append(str(user))

max_users = " and ".join(users)
```

With the script abovee can now manipulate the JSON data as a normal Python object.
<br>
<br>
Running this script will get the following results:


```python
s = "s" if len(users) > 1 else ""
print(f"user{s} {max_users} completed {max_complete} TODOs")
```

    users 5 and 10 completed 12 TODOs


Now we will create a JSON file that contains the completed TODOs for each of the users who completed the maximum number of TODOs.

We will filter todos and write the resulting list to a file:


```python
# Define a function to filter out completed TODOs of users with max completed TODOS.
def keep(todo):
    is_complete = todo["completed"]
    has_max_count = str(todo["userId"]) in users
    return is_complete and has_max_count

# Write filtered TODOs to file.
with open("filtered_data_file.json", "w") as data_file:
    filtered_todos = list(filter(keep, todos))
    json.dump(filtered_todos, data_file, indent=2)
```

We have gotten rid of all the data not needed and saved important data to a new file.

Check out the script filtered_data_file.json to verify everything worked (that everything supposed to be there is there). 

## The End


v2.2
